okay we're now ready to run the app and
investigate the various stages of the
activity lifecycle now before I do that
though I wanted to talk briefly about
the pains down here these various
windows that you can pop up and that's
because you can actually reposition them
using the COG wheel over here in the
right hand side so I'm going to come
over here and choose floating mode from
the pop-up menu once we do that you can
see we've got just a little window that
is now separate from the main Android
studio window and we can move that
around so that can be really handy if
you've got a single monitor because you
can display that in the emulator at the
same time or we can actually see a lot
more screen real estate which we're
going to be doing here in this video but
it's also useful if you've got two
monitors because you can put a log cat
on one window and the main programming
code your designer and so forth and see
the code on the other monitor so quite
handy alright so let's run this hap so
I'm going to leave this a load can open
here run our app I just need to click
that to bring that back on the screen
again and I'll also bring the emulator
over so there's our app and you can see
over here now in logcat that the
uncreate myth has been called up here
then neon start and then the onresume
and that's why we would have expected
from the activity lifecycle you know
because this was the first time the app
was launched there's no state to be
restored so consequently or restore
instance state wasn't called all right
so let's add some text now and click the
button a few times and keep an eye on
the logcat when we kind of because what
we're going to do is try rotating it
into landscape mode but first I'm going
to enter these three items red and you
can see only click has been called in
the logcat their milk cheese so we've
got three items there and what I'm going
to do is make sure there's some text in
the editor and then we're going to move
it until in Skype mode so I'm going to
type in cream here then move over till
in state they can see we've still got
cream showing there and we can see that
over here now the various offense that
would call we had our own click method
called three times which you would have
expected for the three items because I
didn't click the button the fourth time
but then what happened was when the
device was rotated
the unpause method was called followed
by unsaved instance state and then on
stop and then on destroyed and you may
have seen that the app briefly vanished
from the device screen briefly while it
was rotating into landscape mode now
because it was Android destroying the
activity and it was in the foreground
Android then recreates the activity
again so that's where the uncreate on
start' is actually called and because
we've got now some state because on
saving since state was called prior to
going into landscape mode this result on
restored state is called automatically
by and route by android and then finally
we've got on the Unruh zoom method being
called as well and after that the app's
once again running in the foreground
which is doing there now so let's add a
comet down here just so we know we were
at but we'll type in back button what
we're about to do is now select the back
button to move back firstly I'm going to
remove the keyboard by pressing back so
we're not expecting anything to be
called there but now if I actually go
back again
it's gonna close the app and what's
happened here you can see that what I've
actually done that we've got on pause
called on stop called and then on
destroy called
and obviously at that point the app was
then closed note that there wasn't a
call this time to on save instance State
and that's because the state won't be
restored when the apps relaunched
because Android only restores state if
it was responsible for destroying the
activity you know if the user chooses to
close the app and they wouldn't expect
it to start up with the data already in
the end it text from the last run well
that said though there may however
expect to see the bread milk and cheese
in the textview but if you wanted to
save those results then on stop would be
the place to do that now because the
logcat
gets cleared we'll be running out from
Android studio what I'm going to do is
use the emulators app screen to launch
our button click counter app again so
I'm gonna type in a comet thrown into
LOGCAP first just put launching app and
they're going to come back here and
we're going to launch the app we're
doing that sideways because I'm still in
the landscape mode button killer app I'm
gonna click on that there's our button
counter app running again there
and looking at the log you can see that
we've got uncreate on start and on
resume cold so that's good then what
we'll do now is we'll just go back to
portrait boat
there's portrait mode again there now
just so it's a little bit easier we can
see a bit more of the log and the divide
the application running on our end
emulator as well and we can see down
that by doing that this second time
we've got on create called because I
went back to portrait mode on start and
on same instance state by the way was
called just prior to or just after we
rotated the device back to portrait so
while it was still on that's in that
process of moving back to portrait on
saving since state was called then
consequently down here on start on
restore instance state was called then
on resume and then we're packed up with
the app running in portrait mode again
all right you see there the life cycle
was being fairly consistent there type
in locking screen deck so I'm gonna time
locking the screen into logcat and what
I'm doing now is just that we're going
to briefly lock the screen and on an
emulator we can do that by the power
button so if we just press the power
button quickly and just and release it
fairly quickly then that locks it just
like a new a real Android device would
if we hold it down and it'll shove it
down so I'm just going to click it
briefly and there's our lap our lock so
the application is now going to lock
bearing in mind we've got some extra
bits and pieces showing here as well
which we're ignoring but the ones that
we want to see here is the on pause
called on savings and State chord and
then on stop called so note that the
user hasn't exited the app as such let
us switched off the screen and that's
why androids calling on save instance
state after on pause and on stop saying
chord in our apps now no longer running
in the near foreground so I'm gonna add
another comment down here now and we'll
put a lock screen and we're gonna use
the power button to unlock the screen so
I'm gonna click it once quickly again so
just like a normal Android app we'd only
just swipe to get back to where we were
again
alright so at this point you might be
wondering well did screen was locked
when the screen was locked
we had unsaved instance take hold so why
wasn't on restore instance date called
when we unlock the screen well there's
no reason to call up
that's because the app part of the
activity rather wasn't destroyed
it was just stopped so in other words no
state was lost and there's no reason to
restore it we can actually check that
there what we can do is we can go ahead
and enter our items again so I can enter
bread milk cheese here we're going into
cream again but this time we're not
going to tap the button like we did last
time it'll lock the screen again and you
can see what's happened here
we've got this is some more android
studio who are functionality problems
here because we've got the unlock screen
and you saw that when I went back to it
nothing was seemed to be working for a
while we were getting any entries into
here and then when I blocked the screen
we've got suddenly got all these entries
coming back through again so the port I
want to make here though is that after
we unlocked the screen we actually did
get on restart called and we got on star
called and then we also got on a regime
call all three of them were called very
quickly so you can see here by the time
over to the left-hand side but the point
was that on restore interstate wasn't it
called when we unlock the screen and he
came the reason for that is that if I'm
Android Studios I'm actually wasn't a
reason to call up well that's because
the activity wasn't destroyed
it was just stopped so no state was lost
and there's no reason to restore it you
also saw even though I've locked the
screen now we did get the unclick calls
successfully yeah being called when we
clicked the buttons as we would expect
but they weren't updated in the log I
suspect that some sort of issue with
logcat probably because I'm running at a
beta version of Android studio you can
see that they were actually called and
then when I locked the screen we got on
pause chord then on savings and state
called and then a swallows on stop at
this point we've now locked the screen
and again on save instance States called
because Android might destroy the
activity where the screens locked
you know if updates start downloading or
some other app wakes up memory may get
low because our app is no longer in the
foreground it's fair game for Android to
destroy it if it needs extra resources
so that's the reason that Terron savings
and state is actually called here when
the screens actually locked
now with that said though unless Android
does destroy the activity then there's
no need for it to restore the state so
that's way in this case it didn't call
the on restore instance date when we
unlocked the screens have the same thing
should happen if I go to unlock the
screen again we've still got our items
here so nothing's been destroyed but our
log is not working at the moment but
hopefully that location catch back up
but in any event I can assure you like
it happened last time that the on
restore in the state won't be called and
that's because the application was
stopped and it wasn't destroyed so it's
just there as we left it in other words
we can say that by the three entries
that we've got here and also the entry
is still showing in the error text so
again if Android did destroy the
activity then we wouldn't expect to see
our bread milk and cheese here because
normally on the on restore instance
states is called this isn't actually
saved because we haven't written any
code to do that yet the only thing that
is normally saved is this option
whatever we've typed in the edit text so
again unless Android does destroy the
activity there's no need for it to
restore the state so that's why in this
case our mr. Winston state wasn't being
called it wasn't called last time and
wasn't called this time either but again
we can't really confirm that right now
because Android studio seems to be
playing up a little bit and it's not
actually showing us all the logs so I
can see that it seems to just have been
stalled there it's not actually updating
and I can confirm that by trying to add
a click on the button now we've added
that here but we're not giving any login
trees in the logcat so clearly a bug
with Android studio at the moment but
anyway you've seen that work earlier in
the video so that's actually the
activity life cycle so that technique by
the way of adding logging to all the
methods is great to see or for seeing
what's going on and when various methods
are called now it doesn't just apply to
the life cycle methods either there's
all sorts of situations where we have to
provide callbacks for Android to call
adding logging to them so that you can
see exactly when Android does call them
is a very good way to develop your
understanding of how Android works well
so just to show you this before I finish
this video that the logcat should still
be working I believe it's a problem to
do with
Android's GTO probably linking to the
emulator so if I go to close this
emulator down hopefully what we'll see
is some errors pop up I want to see one
of those new log entries actually just
come through at the moment they haven't
come back through since we lock the
screen for the second time I'm gonna
just try this again start our API 26m
you later at some point we'll probably
see these entries
they're still not getting any logging
output there so what I might do is I
will just close down Android studio but
at some point what we do here
you should find this gets fixed up this
will be a good thing to show you if you
in a similar situation where you're
giving a lock up and you're not seeing
logcat working the combination of these
things should actually fix the problem
all right so I'm starting that again I'm
gonna go open the logcat yes we would
expect now there's no local entry but
wait till it initializes oh I can see
we've got the three entries showing
there from our most recent call and we
just go back to our emulator again and
if I just run this again so there's some
sort of temporary issue there probably
again relating to the fact this is a
beta version of Android studio where
it's not doing the right thing you can
see we've now got the log entry is
working again so what I want to do is
just do that last bit of toilet that
lasts testing and just to show that it
is working so if I type in these three
entries against their bread milk and
cheese cheese and if I type cream this
time I'm not going to add that and I'm
going to lock the device so you can see
the lock the device was locked we had on
pause called on saving instance state
called and on stop called
so hopefully now when i unlock it we
should see what I originally wanted to
show you was he understands a state not
being caught by being able to see the
other entry so let's try that and you
can see in here that's really what I
wanted to show you early on so clearly
that was a bug with Android studio so
unsafe instance state was called prior
to us locking the screen as well as on
state and then cause previously on pause
but once we came back after unlocking
the screen we only got on restart on
start and on regime we didn't get the on
restore instance state being called
because unless hand droid does destroy
the activity and there's no need to
actually call that on restore instance
state and again if that was true we'd
expect to still see our list and cream
in the edit text we and when we unlock
the device and you can see here that
clearly it hasn't been destroyed because
we can still see those items all right
so we got there in the end had a few
problems with the software but till we
managed to get it working
so that's the activity lifecycle now
that technique adding logging to all the
methods is great for seeing what's going
on and also when various methods are
called it doesn't just apply to the
lifecycle methods either because there's
all sorts of situations where we have to
provide callbacks for Android to call
and at in logging to them in so you can
see exactly when Android does call them
is very good way to develop your
understanding of how Android works all
right so there's a few important
implications of what we've looked at
with the activity lifecycle we're going
to discuss those in the next video